Group F                                12th February 2014                        Project Management

VR & its Effects on Society


Formal Report
  












































Report by Sean Moylan, Ronan Connolly, John Walsh, Vytas Vaiculis, Andrew Sweeney
________________


Index




* Introduction
   * Choosing our topic
   * Who does what?
   * What’s next?
* Introduction to VR (Sean)
   * Virtual Reality
   * Oculus Rift
   * Virtuix Omni
* Social Life & Leisure Time (Ronan)
   * Social Interaction
   * Gaming
   * Tourism & TV
   * Summary
* Social Impact (John)
   * Social Impact
   * Mental Health
   * Physical Health
   * Society
* Education, Health & Military (Vytas)
   * Education
   * Health
   * Military
* Into science fiction and the future (Andrew)
   * Future considerations with Virtual Reality
   * Rules
   * Privacy
   * Security
* Summary
   * How we felt the presentation went
   * What we gained
* Conclusion
   * Pros
   * Cons
   * Overall Conclusion
________________
Introduction
This formal report is for Annette Cosgrove’s module “Project Management & Collaborative Communication”, specifically talking about the presentation contained within this module.


We were split up into groups of approximately 4 to 5 people. Sean Moylan, Ronan Connolly, John Walsh, Vytas Vaiciulis and Andrew Sweeney were the members of group ‘F’.
Choosing our topic
We were looking through the various sample topics Annette showed us.
Some of the topics were cloud computing, internet privacy, open source technology versus proprietary, distance learning, role of internet restructuring society and social media advertising. We were also given the option of coming up with our own topic as long as it was computing related and she agreed that it was an okay topic.


The overall structure of the presentation was that we would have both the pro and con sides of each topic and that the length of the total presentation would be 30 minutes long.


We wanted to choose something that would catch the audience’s attention, that was very relevant to them and that was something we were really interested and passionate about.
We chose VR (Virtual Reality).


It’s quite a broad topic so we narrowed the title down to “VR & its Effects on Society”.
This is quite relevant currently due to many emerging VR technologies in development, soon to release!
Technologies presently are mainly concerned with head mounted displays like the Oculus Rift and omni-directional tread-mills such as the Omni.
 matrix-code.jpg 

We realised with the release of these VR technologies where people would be immersed into these ultra realistic virtual environments there would be a huge amount of benefits as well as negative outcomes.


We brainstormed through the various pros and cons of VR and then split these points between us.
________________
Who does what?
* Sean took the task of laying the groundwork for the presentation, focusing on defining VR, the Oculus Rift and the Omni, when it’s coming out and where it’s going.
* Ronan was given the task of outlining the pros of VR specifically to do with social life and leisure time.
* He was also in charge of writing the introduction to this report.
* John took the task of talking about the cons of VR in relation to social life.
* Vytas was given the task of talking about the pros of VR specifically to do with the government entities.
* Andy took the task of talking about the cons of VR in the distant future.
He was also in charge of wrapping up the presentation with a few words and writing the summary/conclusion to this report..


We decided that we would have a one to two hour meeting at least once a week to make sure we were all progressing.
We also made a point to have at least two practice presentations before doing the actual presentation.


We created a folder on Google Drive where we documented the meetings, this gave everyone an outline of what we were talking about which was great for anyone who couldn’t attend.
We used Google Slides for our presentation which was very helpful as it meant we could all work on the slides together, talk to each other, see the changes instantaneously all from the comfort of our own homes, this is modern collaboration of the highest degree.
What’s next?
We have outlined how we chose our topic, who is talking about what and how our group is structured. Next each group participant will talk about his chosen topic then we’ll wrap the report up with a summary/conclusion.
All references are noted at at the bottom of each page (footnotes).


We hope for you to take something away from this report and leave with a basic overview and understanding of Virtual Reality.
  









________________


Introduction to VR (Sean)
Virtual Reality
Introduction
Virtual reality, also known as immersive multimedia is used for a very wide range of tasks 
such as gaming, military training, flight simulators, education and also to explore places while staying in the comfort of your own home.


In VR you can do whatever you want, its only holdback is your imagination.
This can seem like a bad thing when it comes to gaming as it is hard to point out how much you should be allowed to do in the VR, meaning rules should be put in place.
Gaming  
Gaming would be by far the most popular form of VR, gamers would become immersed into the games that they have been screen bound too for so long, giving more intense experience. Car games would begin to feel like you are actually in the car going crazy speeds and first person shooters would make you feel like you are fighting for your life in a warzone.


Military
Soldiers would be able to do all their war training within the VR, making it a safe environment to to practise shooting, stealth tactics and much more.
This would mean that the soldiers would be able to go to war already knowing what it will feel like, this will allow them to be better at their job before they have even begun.


Flight Simulators 
This will help people who are training to be a pilot to fly without the danger of them crashing the plane when they make a mistake. Also it is good because their skills can be tested by putting them into really difficult situations and see how they react under the pressure


Education
In the near future I believe VR will be a big part of education as it will allow kids to interact with things they would have found uninteresting  and to be able to see things as if they were real. Things like history could become a fun class to go to because you get to explore ancient rome with all your classmates or go into one the pyramids without leaving the classroom.
Oculus Rift        
For this section of the presentation I talked about what exactly the Oculus Rift[1] is and what        its features are.
It was my favourite part of the presentation because when I was doing research on it, I found it was very fascinating.


What is it?
The Oculus Rift is a virtual reality HMD (Head Mounted Display) thats main use is for gaming.  It was first announced at E3 in June 2012 and has had major hype ever since.  
At this time there is a development kit that was sent out to developers so they could get a feel for the device and see how their games felt when using the rift.
Currently there are only a handful of games that can be played using the Oculus like Half Life 2 and Team Fortress 2. There are also a few VR demos that you are able to download where you can explore a forest or go on a rollercoaster ride. 
The Customer model is going to look a bit different to the developer kit and will also feature a full HD 1080p display, the first prototype of the device had a 5.6 inch display and was then upped to a 7 inch display for the developer kit making it a bit bulkier.
The FOV (Field Of View) in the Oculus is more than 90 degrees which is more than double the FOV of most competing products, this means when looking straight you are able to see things in the corner of your eye nearly to the same point as in reality.
Its release date is expected to be somewhere near the end of 2014 or early 2015.


Kickstarter
When funding for the oculus rift began there was a kickstarter[2] account set up on the 1st of August just after the E3 announcement to try and raise money from the public.
They had not expected the amount of attention that had been taken in the Oculus Rift.
Within the first 4 hours they had reached their goal amount of $250,000, then getting over 1 million in less than 36 hours. They ended their kickstarter account just as they had reached $2,437,429.
Virtuix Omni  
Introduction
The Omni[3] is It is an omnidirectional video game platform that allows players to get the feeling that they are walking when they are really staying in the same place. The Omni works by your feet sliding down the the bowl shaped platform using special shoes that help your feet slide. It comes with a harness that stops you from falling, it clips on around your waist and allows you to turn a full 360 degrees.
The Omni is currently using the Xbox Kinect sensor to track feet movement on the platform. It has been tested with the Oculus Rift when the prototype was first released and both the omni and Oculus Rift are compatible with the game Team Fortress 2 but the Omni can work with any HMD.
  

The product spent two years in development before it was put onto Kickstarter on June 4th 2013 for public funding, it reached its target amount of $150’000 nearly instantly. Virtuix announced that the Kickstarter funding would be put towards the mass production of the product. It was intended to be released in January of this year (2014) but has been pushed back to March / April.
 




________________
Social Life & Leisure Time (Ronan)
Social Interaction  
Social Interaction will change considerably when VR comes into the mainstream.
You can already see how people spend much of their time on Facebook, Twitter and other social media.


This can be seen as a con, as people are maybe spending less physical/real time with people but overall they get to be connected with more people, more of the time.
You’ll be close to all your friends & family
When I worked in Julian Graves my manager’s brother lived in the States, she got to hang out with her brother on skype all the time, and got to watch her nieces and nephews grow up, without this digital technology she wouldn’t really of known her nieces and nephews at all, nor would they of known her.


With VR you’ll eventually be able to make a skype call and do amazing things with your friends and family.


Like for example go for a walk on the beach, play games together, go to the cinema, or even just hang out in your virtual house.


It’ll bring people together no matter where you live, geographical barriers won’t matter as much as they did in the past.
Working from home
People will fall in love with this technology, they’ll be able to possibly work from home but be in a different environment, distance learning and work is already popular, imagine you could actually be working with your colleagues in a virtual reality but been at home.


If you can collaborate, see each other and get the work done without actually been together, what’s the need of actually physically meeting up?


You could use this in other circumstances, for example people controlling robots or training simulators.
People are already learning how to drive, practice flying and various other tasks in simulators.
When these simulators become so accurate that there’s not much difference to the real thing, they will be the norm.

In an interview with OR(Oculus Rift) founder Palmer Luckey, he mentioned various uses for the OR, including training firefighters in virtual hazardous areas and people controlling robots with VR, these robots could go to areas where humans cannot visit like for instance where a nuclear power plant has exploded.


If you’ve ever seen the movie surrogates then you can imagine the potential.


If you’re working in a Virtual World, then why not spend your leisure time in a virtual world.
People are already buying their shopping online, you could go to a virtual shop and actually see the things you want to buy, once you purchase them, they’d be delivered to your home.
World will be a smaller place
As the world will be a smaller place, people will feel more related, suddenly where you're from won’t matter as much, people will care more about your value as an individual.
How much fun are you to be around, how well do you communicate, how well do you share your thoughts, how creative and innovative are you?


People also tend to be less shy when online, I think this will transcribe into the VR and people will be more open about themselves.


You can hang out with people who have similar interests to yourself, at the moment if you're the only person in a village or town with a certain interest that interest may die out due to not having a way to nurture it.


With VR in an instant you can be with a group of people with similar interests, in this way your interests can grow into something strong and useful.


I believe with VR people are going to follow their true passions in life and as a consequence people and the world will be a better place :)
We’ll be safer  
If you’re working from home, spending time with your friends & family at home, gaming from home, doing everything from home then you are safer.

There’s less chance of you being mugged or hurting yourself.
Gaming
Games are already very addictive, people spend so much of their time playing games, imagine if it felt like you were actually in the game, like that was your physical environment.
This is what OR is mainly aimed at, at the moment.

It’s being tested and developed for the steam platform, some games are already made for it, for example the sci-fi game Eve Online has created a OR Space Fighter game, this involves just using the OR, so you’re sitting down.


All the big games will have a OR game made in the next couple of years.
It’ll start with games where you sit down and just use the OR with the steam platform, then it will be available on other consoles like the Xbox and Playstation, eventually competitors will come in and drive the prices down, but the immersion will go up. Attachments and add ons will become very popular, like steering wheels and guns as controllers.


Arcades will become very popular for bigger enhancements like roller coaster simulators that may need wind to help with immersion.

Then it’ll get mixed with things like the omni where you actually walk around, the sensors tracking your whole body, so every movement you make in the game down to your facial expression is shown. You could even have your actual image shown, so that it’s actually you in the game, not an avatar cloak.


  

________________
Immersion
I mentioned the word immersion a few times already, immersion is one of the key words when dealing with VR, it’s all about tricking the brain into believing Virtual Reality is Physical Reality, they’ve done many tests on the brain while using OR, and so far the brain kind of believes it but there’s still a fair bit to go, walking around, looking around and having the sound is one thing, but perhaps we need things like wind generators and rumbling to make it a full experience.
The main focus I believe for VR developers is getting people more immersed, I believe the competition with VR between companies will make VR evolve incredibly fast.
God like powers
People will want to live in VR all the time, people already live in games like the sims, second life and skyrim, imagine you were actually in that game, you might never want to come out, you have god like powers, you can do amazing things, why would you want to live a normal life?
You can already make money from playing games, I believe this will become even more popular with VR, competitions will become more popular. If you’re really good, you can win a lot of money.
Reward Factors
The reward factors for games are endless, your brain releases a good feeling chemical when you achieve something, we already know that games can release this chemical, with VR making the game seem real, this reward factor is going to make you feel great! :)
Fun, fun, fun
Don’t forget that games are incredibly fun, you’ll be able to do everything and anything you’ve always dreamt of, from flying a plain, being a truck driver to being in the army or blowing the moon up with a missile, the possibilities are endless. Gaming is going to the next level.
If it was near-ideal, how much time would you spend inside virtual reality?
[4]  


________________
Tourism & TV
Virtual Tourism is going to be a huge, cities, countrysides and buildings will be virtually recreated for people to visit.
You’ll be able to take visit anywhere and everywhere you’ve always dreamt of including places from the past, present and future.
There’s already a company recreating museums and galleries, they’re called “europeana”:
Europeana.eu is an internet portal that acts as an interface to millions of books, paintings, films, museum objects and archival records that have been digitised throughout Europe
They digitise millions of books, paintings, films, museum objects and archival records throughout europe for people to view.
They have a virtual Louvre museum for the OR in development at the moment.
More and more companies will have a VR space for customers to go.


  
[5]
Stroll around Rome, Walk on the moon
You’ll be able to visit ancient cities like Rome.
Or visit present places like Tokyo, New York.
Try before you buy
Or even concept places from the future like what it would be like to live in one of those mega structures where the whole city is one building, this would be great for architects, or for people getting a house built for them, they could try before they buy.


If you were stuck between going on holidays in Paris or Barcelona, you could walk around the VR for each and then see which one you like more.
New Era of documentaries
TV and documentaries will change dramatically.
You could put on the headset and follow the person in the documentary from their POV.
People who record their experiences while wearing a goPro or google glass for example can let other people experience their adventures through the VR.


This will be great for companies, people who are recording these adventures and for people who wouldn’t usually be able to experience these amazing explorations.


People may live stream their lives using smart glass.


A whole new world of TV will emerge.


  
[6]


________________


Summary
So as you can see there are many pros to Virtual Reality.


You can be with your friends and family anywhere in the world, work from anywhere in the world and do pretty much anything and everything wherever you are.
This makes the world a very small place, people feel more connected and as such can connect to one another more intimately.


Gaming being the main focus at the moment is going to be absolutely crazy, you will be fully immersed into these virtual worlds.


The virtual tourism industry will have an explosion of growth, you’ll be able to visit all these amazing place.
As so will the TV industry grow tremendously, Movies, documentaries, streaming smartglass, and just generally great interactive viewing experiences will be achieved.


And remember the main thing, it’s going to be a hell of a lot of fun :)


  




________________


Social Impact (John)
The effects of VR on social and physical health can’t really be measured as of yet, we haven’t experimented around with VR enough to get a clear understanding of its effects. We can however look at the internet in general and how that's affected social interaction between people. Gaming is another area in where we can examine the mental and physical health of younger people and how it's effecting things like study, work and general fitness of people in the 21st century.


  

Social Impact
The social impact of using VR device’s is something that hasn’t been studied as of yet but I believe there will be people looking closely at the release of these VR headsets in the coming years.


Social consequences are a very real part of gaming addiction. Addicted gamers spend a lot of time playing, so much that their personal relationships get neglected and sometimes disappear altogether. Among addicted gamers who are married, up to 50 percent report a strain in their marriage as a result of their addiction. After reading a few articles online I found various stories, one of which described an unidentified man who installed an online gaming program onto his laptop so he could play at work, even though he knew that getting caught would mean getting fired, and another story where a wife whose husband had begun playing "all the time” because he said it took his mind off his problems[7]. (reference to stories in footnote)


It's not just careless neglect that costs some gamers their relationships or friendships. Some of them talk so much about the game their currently playing, at exclusion of everything else that, they can't, or won't, engage in real world conversations. Also because their friends talk about other things, they might begin to feel left out, which in turn could cause them to feel offended. It doesn't seem to occur to some that they've chosen to be left out by devoting most of their time to gaming.
Mental Health
You might be thinking video games and VR, that’s possibly a dangerous mix, especially when already addictive video games become even more addictive with the graphics advancement of VR.


Quoting from an online source from reuters.com, I have found some interesting results.


"When children became addicted, their depression, anxiety, and social phobias got worse, and their grades dropped, said Douglas A. Gentile, who runs the Media Research Lab at Iowa State University in Ames and worked on the study.“[8] - from an article at reuters.com, I found interesting results from studies they reported on.


It might seem that video games and VR could only have a damaging affect on the health of younger people from playing material with lots of graphic elements, there also exists the positive side-effect of video games and as well with virtual environments, like the Oculus Rift creates.


“A 2013 study found that playing shooter video games improved a player's capacity to think about objects in three dimensions, just as well as academic courses to enhance these same skills, according to the study.”[9] - taken from an article at dailymail.co.uk. This found that gaming has some positive effects on the human brain from problem solving to improved reasoning.


So from researching online I found plenty of results from all sides of the argument, each study finding its own conclusion on the effects of gaming and possibly VR in years to come.


  







Physical Health
Another side-effect from the usage of electronic devices such as the Oculus Rift VR headset could be the physical health of a person. Problems may occur when using such devices for long periods, physical damage could include repetitive strain injuries, eye strain and other side-effects like obesity. When it comes to videogames, the VR headset could strain such areas. Physical fitness of a person can be potentially affected for the better, with such devices it requires a lot of movement from the user, so that been said it could help gamers get off their couches and actively fight against the ever increasing obesity epidemic. Other physical damage related to the subject could include carpal tunnel, migraines, sleep disturbances, backaches, eating irregularities, and poor personal hygiene.


.  [10]


Every hour spent in front of monitor or display device, could be an hour spent doing something active and equally entertaining. It’s tough to escape technology in modern day life, but possible to achieve I believe. 


Later studies found that the association of video game play had an increase in food intake in teens and young adults. A session of play resulted in an increase of food intake, regardless of appetite.[11] Other devices like the Xbox Kinect, Wii and other physically active devices found to help fight against some of these problems with inactivity. At Baylor College of Medicine, a study was also carried out about children claiming that there is no evidence which supports physically active games help the child benefit from the activity in anyway. It's estimated that children spend about 25 percent of the their waking hours sitting in front of the television or playing video games, according to some statistics, children who extensively watch television or play videogames show an increase of obesity.
[12]


Society
Is society effected by video game violence? Will virtual environments like the one the Oculus Rift creates allow gamers to become monsters that shoot up high schools and endanger people in the future? All evidence found online seems to point in one direction, that, yes it will have an effect on society. Using some information I found from research I hope to shed some light on this developing problem. Below you see an image from the “Columbine Shooting” in 1999.


  



Will these shooting become more prevalent in coming years? It seems so according to the amount of new reports and statistics. As the graph below shows, the amount of shootings have increased dramatically over the years.


  
[13]
Will we allow coming generations to live in fear of unstable individuals that have been twisted by modern society? will VR have a negative or positive effect on future society? No one really knows the answers to these questions just yet, lets hope it won’t be too late to reverse the effects tf does.
Education, Health & Military (Vytas)
Education
With every technology there are ups and downs, 40 years ago nobody could have imagined what a big part of computers would be in education, today we couldn’t imagine doing education without computers.


It enhances our ability to learn and speeds up the rate at which we acquire new knowledge. Virtual Reality is an extension of the computer, it’s an extra tool in your educational toolbelt for you to educate others and yourself.


  



In todays world where education is still being taught as it was 100 years ago, it fails to interest young minds in science,  engineering and other disciplines.


With Development of devices like Oculus Rift which will be released later this year (2014). It will  be economically feasible to put a VR set in every classroom across the globe. People have tried to develop VR technologies before, but none of them have been successful enough to generate as much interest and technological advancement as Oculus Rift, it will be a game changer, it’ll make interaction with computers so much easier and interactive, we will be immersing into the digital world more and more over the Decades and this will be big step forward.


In years to come we will see more and more submersion into the digital world, the monitor screen was the big interacting object with digital reality for decades now and moving away from this will be a big change, new applications and techniques will be developed to explore this new digital world.






Health
With VR the Health sector will also see great benefits, with the development of systems like the da Vinci surgical system, distance will no longer be a factor, surgeons can operate on patients miles away or even oceans across, it breaks barriers, and the best health care can be available to anyone in the world, if you combine this with current development in AI such as Watson, the benefits are enormous.



The da Vinci Surgical System
Seen in the Image below is “The da Vinci Surgical System”.
  



The system eliminates the need for numerous staff to operate. It needs at a minimum a: doctor, nurse and technician (looks after the hardware).
Doctors can even monitor their patients at a distance by injecting a small device into the patient's blood stream which monitors their vital signs and transmits that information to the Doctor.


Two of the most evolving technologies at the moment are computers and medical devices, already in many areas we see the medical and computer Industry merging together, and as you can see with this example “the da Vinci Surgical System” when it gets further developed it will be a big game changer in the world of health, especially when it’s accessibility to people. 


It also takes away the burden from people, these systems are more independent.
________________
Military
The military has always has been the first one to adopt any new technology and take advantage of it, as far as Virtual reality goes in military it’s been around for decades. They have very advanced planes and war machinery, before people are allowed to use the physical machines they go through vigorous training, but even after that it’s too dangerous to let them fly an 80 million dollar fighter jet, or fly a space shuttle worth around 2 billion. So the next best thing is a flying simulator, these highly advanced simulators are developed for pilots to fly fighter planes and the mother of planes the space shuttle. These simulators are highly advanced pieces of machinery that simulate visual effects and the movement of the craft. 


NASAs Space Shuttle Simulator
One of the latest of NASA's flight simulators has a room dedicated to it and it cost 10 million US dollars to make.


  



The military have always had big budgets for their technology, whatever they are developing it’s a good way to start new technology because no private investor would want to invest that much money and take on such a big risk.


So we see a lot of technology start off as military applications and then eventually go down the steps of society for everyday use by people like us, and the we can take advantage of it.




________________


Here we can see some research done by Independent Kzero group on Virtual reality and how popular it is, as we can see in the first graph below the popularity has been growing increasingly fast, as new products come on the market, more users sign up.


  
[14]


We can see it’s about double each year so its nearly exponential growth and in the second graph we can see that age is not a factor, it has penetrated all age groups.


  
[15]


Into science fiction and the future (Andrew)
Future considerations with Virtual Reality


The human race sits upon on the edge of this virtual reality technology. The technology is flourishing, changing and it’s gaining popularity. The Oculus Rift had almost 2 and a half million euro pledged to its kickstarter campaign [16] with an over all ninety one million raised towards its development. Over the next couple of years it is probable that it will be common place for every member of the family to own their own VR headset or at least have one per home. But what about a future tense or hundreds of years from now?


As with any new technology the pitfalls won't immediately be visible. We can't tell for sure how things with be if our society was to fully embrace a global virtual environment but we can definitely extrapolate.


One definition of virtual reality states “Virtual reality is a form of technology which creates computer generated worlds or immersive environments which people can explore and in many cases, interact with” [17]. One can argue that video games carry the same definition but without the immersiveness of the user. Following on from this line of thought we can easily cast some of the same behaviours and rules of computer games onto a virtual reality environment. The three major issues users face every day in gaming would be the same issues faced by using a global simulated environment. I have narrowed down these prevalent issues to rules,privacy and security. These core issues are everywhere. As human beings, we sometimes think and act as we like without careful consideration. So rules are in place to protect others and to protect ourselves. Privacy is a forefront issue for users in a society that will have 2 billion computers by 2015 [18], with these high numbers of computers you can imagine the amount of important and private information that is transferring daily across servers world wide. Security of our physical person and virtual being (representative of a person) will be a major issue too. I hope to cover these topics in detail for you.
  

Rules


“Gameplay is the pattern defined through the game rules, connection between player and the game, challenges and overcoming them, plot and player's connection with it. Video game gameplay is distinct from graphics, and audio elements.” [19]


By this definition if you were to spend a lot of your time in a virtual world, gameplay would actually be a definition for “being” or “living” in this virtual space. This living would be governed by rules, like in any game. In all online games where you interact with others there is always strict communication rules in place. Abuse and harassment through text or voice over ip protocol (VOIP) takes place in such games. If this data is picked up by the inbuilt data-combining software or reported (by players) and moderated (by staff) can the users actions meet repercussions? This really means that the rules for any game when applied to a virtual world are in a form a law. Breaking the law in any case usually leads to grave repercussions and punishment.


In a virtual world where people can control boundaries of this new realm and knowing their potential for freedom the actions of the user could be anything. If rules aren't in place how much chaos would take place? If everyone had no culpability and could say and act how they liked in a fully immersive world, restrictions would have to be placed on peoples action and conversation. Some sort of conversational filters would have to be carefully implemented. Moderation will have to be in place as users will want protection from profanity, harassment, xenophobia and possible avatar interactions. A lot of these rules on communication are in place already in video games.


This begs the question of... in a virtual world where we can potentially do anything why would we limit the freedom of the users and should we limit the users?




  





There must be rules on some level to ensure the users protection. Planning for such a system and covering all eventualities will be burdensome and you’d have to account for slang and numerous different languages. There is no way to fully predict peoples actions and how they will treat others in VR. Numerous online games always seem to have a disjointed community based on finding exploits, hacking, abusing and griefing others. So with so many users using the same system someone is bound to find an exploit. This is usually how games are beta tested in the online community. 


Beta testing is when you give a restricted amount of people access to a game such as World of Warcraft or Guildwars. The large group of players get first access to the game and their job is to stumble through it and expose any exploits and bugs in the game. This is the new way to release these type of games.


Users always tend to find exceptions with rules and not everything is black and white.
In games like EVE Online the owners of the game have the opinion: “If you can do it inside the game it’s legal”, this was their response to the theft of thousands of euro’s worth of virtual items.


This topic is very volatile and will be a very controversial issue as the technology will evolve and people will strive for more freedom as the immersiveness of a virtual world becomes more intense. Users will want freedom and protection but a fine line will have to be drawn because everyone has a different view of where the line is. This will be a huge consideration for the technology in the future when it evolves. Some sort of humanitarian committee would have to be set up to draw out these rules because users from all countries with different world outlooks will have to be considered and with such diverse world views (virtual world views) setting up a structure could prove very difficult.
“Rules are not necessarily sacred, principles are.” - Franklin D. Roosevelt


  



Privacy


In a global virtual world that anyone can “log on” to a connection would be made in the same way someone connects to the internet from home. Privacy is becoming a pressing issue with internet users now as the sopa [20]was brought into the world news. People want a level a privacy as they are becoming more and more aware of how much footprint they are leaving online and what kind of information is being gathered and sold about them. Some of this information is kept for years at a time and probably longer as there is no guarantee they will delete it at the time it should be. A few cases [21]have popped up all over the word on how individuals have sued companies because they wouldn’t hand over what information they had collected on them. Every time though the companies have had to fold and comprise a package of what they had collected. In particular Malte Spitz[22] had his phone position tracked for years and showed every tower he ever passed and where he had been while he had his phone on him, which was always.


So this begs the question, if we in the future were to have a global virtual network where we log onto and become immersed with all of our senses. How much of this information would be tracked? The location you sign from even now, from over the internet is tracked by your ISP. So those are just the brass facts. In a virtual world where you move, talk, gesture and where your actions,vital signs and possibly even emotions are tracked, a grand facility for this information would have to be created. Almost every facade on how you communicate could and would be stored about you, like it is today. People don’t like being observed as many studies have shown [23]and people wouldn’t like having marketing (in a virtual world) targeted at them based on conversations you had with others. It seems like if you want  to have this immersion and experience of being in a global virtual world, that the layer of information you will give about yourself by merely being in the system would leave very little room for privacy. Somewhere whatever method you chose to communicate with (in a virtual world) would be tracked and hosted on some server. These systems would cost millions to implement and wouldn’t be hosted for free. As we can see from how online businesses sometimes work they will sell a certain amount of information to other companies about you so they can target you specifically on particular products. We never truly know how much information is gathered about us but we know it’s a lot. Everybody has a virtual footprint spread out between all the companies they’ve interacted with online. Even big companies such as google and facebook with the right pressure will give in to requests from officials for legal issues and just because they have the authority.  You actually give this right up every time you accept a terms of service agreement. It would take a long time to read through the terms for every site you sign up to and every application you use (especially as an I.T student).




All of this privacy we give away through using free services like Facebook,Viber etc. They greatly show how stepping into a virtual world would be the biggest let go of privacy a person could give as a human being. This is of course in an environment where people would be dependant on this kind of system and in an environment where technology has grown to a level where having access to a virtual world would be similar to the same accessibility to the internet. All this information that is kept, could be easily accessible to companies, your data is sold and shared all the time. Authorities could easily gain knowledge of where you are virtually at a given time, what you said in conversation, how you were feeling emotionally and what previous and following actions you carried out.


I propose that the excitement and awe of such a technology and the fact that it could be a staple in every household in the first world will be enough for people to ignore that checkbox they sign saying that the company has the right to collect this information on you. This is because we do it daily. 


Facebook’s Data use policy should be read by every user [24] . How many of us remember reading the terms of use on our Bebo or Myspace accounts, because all of those messages and information are floating around someplace.


Could humans give up that last layer of privacy as they adapt to this possible future technology?


These are huge questions and should be majorly considered, a lot goes into the psychology of how humans act and react. Not everyone acts the same and there are always outliers. To fully embrace a virtual world where such privacy is given up I think society will have to evolve itself first, if we are able.


As users we should be smart and carefully consider what we are giving up as we merge this technology in our daily lives. We should try to become smarter on how we leave our footprint digitally.


“The most sacred thing is to be able to shut your own door.” 


  





Security


“With any new technology… you inherit the security features of a computer”


As any new technology comes into the limelight from the time it hits the market you can be assured there are plenty of people out there who will open up that device and get deep into the software and hardware. Hackers have been doing this with telephone systems, to the phones themselves and in the gaming world consoles have been hacked to run games illegally. People like to see how things work but some lack the genuine interest and like to hack things for malicious reasons. There is no way to know of every possible security risk, loop hole or backdoor in your system unless you have it tested for such things. This applies to any software and hardware. 


In a virtual world you can imagine the devastation to someones property if there is a security breach of any kind. Even for an incident to happen once off, it can have drastic effects and could cause ripples of paranoia throughout the system. People want their personal belongings (virtual or not) secured. Hackers daily get into peoples online accounts and clear them out of all the valuables. They sell them off for gold or real cash and make a profit. Sometimes this can’t be reversed because the system isn’t in place to “roll back” the damage to a users property. Again this leads back to the implementation or rules and privacy. 


Physical security will be an issue. This short comic below illustrates (comedically) a user immersed with the oculus rift. He’s unaware of his physical surroundings and his wallet gets stolen. Anything could be happening around you inside of your own home as you are immersed in a virtual reality system. This is quite scary to imagine and you would be very vulnerable even in the safety of your bedroom.
  

Summary
How we felt the presentation went


We gathered together and formed a group. To make sure our presentation would go as good as possible we all settled on a topic that we have a great interest in, virtual reality. Now that our topic was set, we split up the different pros and cons. Next we carefully structured our arguments so the flow of the presentation would be held and we’d reinforce each others topics. This would ensure we wouldn’t repeat each other as well.


We met up weekly for two o’clock in the library study room. This way we could keep each other abreast of changes and work collaboratively. When the day came after all of the practice and meetings we decided to have one last dry run. We woke early and met up,ate and made sure we were energised. The practice went good. We presented first and went to the time we expected. Everyone in the group spoke for their allotted time and we didn’t feel we had any major hiccups. There was a great interest from the group on the topic we picked so we were ready for any questions thrown our way. Vytas was well prepared for the question about the nasa simulator.


Overall everyone had learned their part, attended every meeting and put time into their slides. We felt the presentation went well and the audience seemed very interested in the topic. We knew our topic would go down well with fellow classmates because of the tight bond in our group. So overall we felt we performed the best we could to an audience with a topic we felt passionate about.


What we gained


In our course we haven't been given any collaborative group projects since a very early group project we had in first year making a website. So the experience of doing a group presentation was an exciting prospect and we were eager to perform. As year two students we have become more tech savvy and decided to create our slides using google slides. We have come to do our report the same way using google documents. This has been a great tool and has given the whole group complete transparency over the whole slideshow and report right up to the submit dates and deadline. These kinds of online collaborative tools and learning methods are great skills to have in your arsenal. 


This presentation being our third presentation in front of our classmates, we’ve all found our confidence in public speaking has grown. This is invaluable because we know in the industry we’ll have many stand up meetings. Working in collaboration, finding middle ground and making decisions as a group has taught us a lot too.
Conclusion
Pros


There are numerous pro’s with Virtual Reality technology. It can affect our lives from social aspects with gaming and education but there is also the more serious side with it’s medical advances and military prospects. As the technology is still in it’s infancy we can easily establish the what ifs and find the day to day use of the technology. VR can become a staple in every home for education and recreation. This can be brought right into the home of the user regardless of where you live and as long as you have a connection to the system. If the VR hardware was to evolve to the level where it can pick up vital signs it could easily be used to diagnose patients from the comfort of their homes. 
There is a very exciting future with VR technology, with the pros numerous in all avenues.
It’s easy to let your imagine run with how you can apply this technology in how you live your life daily.


Cons


Virtual Reality technology could make a great social impact on how we interact with people in the future. The internet already has, internet addiction being an actual term used. There are even programs out there to ween people off internet reliance. People have met their life partners in computer games and through dating/social media sites.


 7hX4W.jpg 



There is a bad side to all of this with people stalking others, cyber bullying and the internet being used as a place to facilitate crime. When Virtual Reality evolves and as it becomes more immersive it’s easy to see how these cons will become even more personal and real. You’ll be meeting life like beings in this VR space and carrying out a certain percentage of your social interaction there. Security of your physical being as you’re “logged on” with this technology could become an issue as you’ll be very vulnerable to what is going on around you.
Overall Conclusion


We’ve had a sit down meeting to discuss which aspect of this Virtual Reality technology wins out the good / bad argument. We have decided it is neither because the technology offers so many strong pros with few cons. The technology is so new and no major infrastructure has been placed underneath it yet. The future of VR certainly holds a lot of questions and major considerations. But for now as we embrace this technology. It’s up to us how we shape it. It’s up to us how secure it will be and how reliable. We should dream as far as the limits of this technology will take us. This technology will only grow to be something essential in our daily lives if we cultivate it properly. As social human beings who seem to need real social interaction do we need this virtual space?


So as we drive this technology and its importance, where should we draw the line on how much we rely on it? The question on whether it is a double edged sword is yet to be seen. Technologies come and go so whether Virtual Reality will become a daily necessity or a trend that will spark out in the future, is down to us. 


“We've arranged a civilization in which most crucial elements profoundly depend on science and technology.” Carl Sagan 






  







 


________________
[1] www.oculusvr.com
[2] www.kickstarter.com
[3] www.virtuix.com
[4] http://ieet.org/index.php/IEET/more/vr20100811
[5] https://share.oculusvr.com/app/museum-of-the-future
[6] http://pullthetrigger.me/2013/02/20/how-it-feels-google-glass/
[7] http://goo.gl/Zpslmt
[8] http://goo.gl/td6j1x
[9] http://goo.gl/cYXzHY
[10] http://goo.gl/uD0GgF
[11] http://goo.gl/bubGyF
[12] http://goo.gl/weOx5R
[13] http://goo.gl/69pVBJ
[14] http://www.creativeshed.com/category/metaverse-journal/events/page/3/
[15] http://www.kzero.co.uk/virtual-reality/
[16] https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1523379957/oculus-rift-step-into-the-game
[17] http://www.vrs.org.uk/ 
[18] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gameplay
[19] http://www.worldometers.info/computers/ 
[20] http://www.forbes.com/sites/larrymagid/2012/01/18/what-are-sopa-and-pipa-and-why-all-the-fuss/
[21] http://www.interaksyon.com/article/17218/austrian-student-sues-facebook-for-keeping-deleted-data
[22] http://www.ted.com/talks/malte_spitz_your_phone_company_is_watching.html
[23] http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-the-illusion-of-being-observed-can-make-you-better-person/
[24] https://www.facebook.com/about/privacy/other